Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptialhour draws on apace.
Four happy days bring in anothermoon,
but oh, methinks, how slow thisold moon wanes.
She lingers my desires like to astep-dame or a dowager
long withering out a young man'srevenue.
Four days will quickly steepthemselves in night.
Four nights will quickly dreamaway the time.
Then the moon, like to a silverbow new bent in heaven,
shall behold the night of oursolemnities.
Go, Philostrate, stir up theAthenian youth to merriments.
Awake the pert and nimble spiritof mirth.
Turn melancholy forth tofunerals.
The pale companion is not forour pomp.
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with mysword
and won thy love doing theinjuries.
But I will wed thee in anotherkey,
with pomp, with triumph, andwith revelling.
Happy be Theseus, our renownedDuke.
Thanks, good Egeus.
What's the news with thee?
Full of vexation come I
with complaint against my child,my daughter Hermia.
My noble lord, this man,Demetrius, hath my consent tomarry her.
And, my gracious Duke, this man,Lysander,
hath bewitched the bosom of mychild.
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hasgiven her rhymes
and interchanged love tokenswith my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at herwindow
sung with feigning voice versesof feigning love
and stolen the impression of herfantasy.
With cunning hath thou filchedmy daughter's heart,
turned her obedience, which isdue to me,
to stubborn harshness.
And, my gracious Duke, be it soshe will not here before yourgrace
consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege ofAthens.
As she is mine, I may dispose ofher,
which shall be either to thisgentleman or to her death,
according to our law immediatelyprovided in that case.
What says thou, Hermia?
Be advised, fair maid: To you,your father should be as a god,
one that composed your beauties,
yea, and one to whom you are butas a form in wax
by him imprinted and within hispower
to leave the figure or disfigureit.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
So is Lysander.
In himself, he is.
But in this kind, wanting yourfather's voice,
the other must be held to be theworthier.
I would my father looked butwith my eyes.
Rather, your eyes must with hisjudgment look.
I do entreat your grace topardon me.
I know not by what power I ammade bold,
nor how it may concern mymodesty
in such a presence here to pleadmy thoughts,
but I beseech your grace that Imay know
the worst that may befall me inthis case
if I refuse to wed Demetrius.
Either to die the death
or to abjure forever the societyof men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, questionyour desires,
know of your youth, examine wellyour blood,
whether, if you yield not toyour father's choice,
you can endure the livery of anun,
for aye to be in shady cloistermewed,
to live a barren sister all yourlife,
chanting faint hymns to thecold, fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessed they that masterso their blood,
to undergo such maidenpilgrimage,
but earthlier happy is the rosedistilled
than that which withering on thevirgin thorn grows,
lives, and dies in singleblessedness.
So will I grow, so live, so die,my lord.
Ere I will yield my virginpatent up unto his lordship,
whose unwished yoke my soulconsents not to givesovereignty.
Take time to pause, and, by thenext new moon--
the sealing-day betwixt my loveand me
for everlasting bond offellowship--
upon that day, either prepare todie
for disobedience to yourfather's will
or else to wed Demetrius, as hewould,
or on Diana's altar to protest
for aye austerity and singlelife.
Relent, sweet Hermia.
And, Lysander, yield thy crazedtitle to my certain right.
You have her father's love,Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia's.
Do you marry him?
Scornful Lysander, true, he hathmy love.
And what is mine my love shallrender him.
And she is mine, and all myright of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.
I am, my lord, as well derivedas he,
as well possessed.
My love is more than his.
My fortunes every way as fairlyranked,
if not with vantage, asDemetrius'.
And, which is more than allthese boasts can be,
I am beloved of beauteousHermia.
Why should not I then prosecutemy right?
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to hishead,
made love to Nedar's daughter,Helena,
and won her soul.
And she, sweet lady, dotes,devoutly dotes,
dotes in idolatry, upon thisspotted and inconstant man.
I must confess that I have heardas much,
and with Demetrius thought tohave spoke thereof,
but, being over-full ofself-affairs,
my mind did lose it.
But, Demetrius, come.
And come, Egeus, you shall gowith me.
I have some private schoolingfor you both.
For you, fair Hermia, look youarm yourself
to fit your fancies to yourfather's will,
or else the law of Athens yieldsyou up--
which by no means we mayextenuate--
to death or to a vow of singlelife.
How now, my love?
Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there dofade so fast?
Belike for want of rain, which Icould well beteem them
from the tempest of my eyes.
Ay me.
For aught that I could everread,
could ever hear by tale orhistory,
the course of true love neverdid run smooth.
But, either it was different inblood--
Oh cross,
too high to be enthralled toolow.
Or else misgraffed in respect ofyears.
Oh, spite.
Too old to be engaged to young.
Or else it stood upon the choiceof friends.
Oh, hell.
To choose love by another'seyes.
Or, if there were a sympathy inchoice,
war, death, or sickness did laysiege to it,
making it momentary as a sound,
swift as a shadow, short as anydream,
brief as the lightning in thecollied night.
Ere a man hath power to say"Behold,"
the jaws of darkness do devourit up,
So quick bright things come toconfusion.
If then true lovers have beenever crossed,
it stands as an edict indestiny.
let us teach our trial patience,
because it is a customary cross
as due to love as thoughts anddreams and sighs,
wishes and tears, poor fancy'sfollowers.
A good persuasion.
Therefore, hear me, Hermia.
I have a widow aunt, a dowagerof great revenue,
and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remoteseven leagues.
And she respects me as her onlyson.
There, gentle Hermia, may Imarry thee,
And to that place the sharpAthenian law cannot pursue us.
If thou lovest me then,
steal forth thy father's housetomorrow night,
and in the wood, a leaguewithout the town,
where I did meet thee once withHelena
to do observance to a morn ofMay,
there will I stay for thee.
My good Lysander.
I swear to thee, by Cupid'sstrongest bow,
by his best arrow with thegolden head,
by the simplicity of Venus'doves,
by that which knitteth souls andprospers loves,
and by that fire which burnedthe Carthage queen,
when the false Troyan under sailwas seen,
by all the vows that ever menhave broke,
in number more than ever womanspoke.
At that same place thou hastappointed me,
tomorrow truly will I meet withthee.
God speed, fair Helena.
Call you me fair?
That fair again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair.
Oh, happy fair.
Your eyes are lodestars,
and your tongue's sweet air moretunable
than lark to shepherd's ear whenwheat is green,
when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching.
Oh, were favour so,
yours would I catch, fairHermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice,my eye your eye,
my tongue should catch yourtongue's sweet melody.
Were the world mine, Demetriusbeing bated,
the rest I'd give to be to youtranslated.
Oh, teach me how you look
and with what art you sway themotion of Demetrius' heart.
I frown upon him, yet he lovesme still.
Oh that your frowns would teachmy smiles such skill.
I give him curses, yet he givesme love.
Oh, that my prayers could suchaffection move.
The more I hate, the more hefollows me.
The more I love, the more hehateth me.
His folly, Helena, is no faultof mine.
None but your beauty.
Oh, would that fault were mine.
Take comfort. He no more shallsee my face.
Lysander and myself shall flythis place.
Before the time I did Lysandersee,
seemed Athens as a paradise tome.
Oh, then, what graces in my lovedo dwell
that he hath turned a heavenunto a hell.
Helen, to you our minds we willunfold.
Tomorrow night, when Phoebe dothbehold
her silver visage in the wateryglass,
decking with liquid pearl thebladed grass,
a time that lovers' flights dothstill conceal,
through Athens' gates we havedevised to steal.
And in that wood,
where often you and I upon faintprimrose beds were wont to lie,
emptying our bosoms of theircounsel sweet,
there my Lysander and myselfshall meet
and thence from Athens turn awayour eyes
to seek new friends and strangercompanies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow.
Pray thou for us.
And good luck grant thee thyDemetrius.
How happy some o'er other somecan be.
Through Athens, I am thought asfair as she.
But what of that?
Demetrius thinks not so.
He will not know what all but hedo know.
And as he errs, doting onHermia's eyes,
so I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding noquantity
love can transpose to form anddignity.
Love looks not with the eyes,but with the mind,
and therefore is winged Cupidpainted blind.
Nor hath love's mind of anyjudgment taste.
Wings and no eyes figure unheedyhaste.
And therefore is love said to bea child,
because in choice, he is so oftbeguiled.
As waggish boys in gamethemselves forswear,
so the boy Love is perjuredeverywhere.
For ere Demetrius looked onHermia's eyne,
he hailed down oaths that he wasonly mine.
And when this hail some heatfrom Hermia felt,
so he dissolved, and showers ofoaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fairHermia's flight,
then to the wood will hetomorrow night pursue her.
And for this intelligence if Ihave thanks,
it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich mypain,
to have his sight thither andback again.
Is all our company here?
You would best to call themgenerally,
man by man, according to thescript.
Here is the scroll of everyman's name
which is thought fit, throughall Athens,
to play in our interlude beforethe duke and the duchess
on his wedding day at night.
First, good Peter Quince, saywhat the play treats on,
then read the names of theactors and so grow to a point.
Marry, our play is the mostlamentable comedy
and most cruel death of Pyramusand Thisbe.
A very good piece of work, Iassure you, and a merry.
Now, good Peter Quince, callforth your actors by the scroll.
Masters, spread yourselves.
Answer as I call you.
Nick Bottom, the weaver.
Ready.
Name what part I am for andproceed.
You, Nick Bottom, are set downfor Pyramus.
What is Pyramus, a lover, or atyrant?
A lover that kills himself mostgallant for love.
That will ask some tears in thetrue performing of it.
If I do it, let the audiencelook to their eyes.
I will move storms.
I will condole in some measure.
To the rest.
Yet my chief humour is for atyrant.
I could play Ercles rarely, or apart to tear a cat in,
to make all split.
The raging rocks and shiveringshocks
shall break the locks of prisongates.
And Phibbus' car shall shinefrom far
and make and mar the foolishfates.
This was lofty.
Now name the rest of theplayers.
This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant'svein.
A lover is more condoling.
Francis Flute, thebellows-maker.
Here, Peter Quince.
Flute, you must take Thisbe onyou.
What is Thisbe, a wanderingknight?
It is the lady that Pyramus mustlove.
Nay, faith, let not me play awoman.
I have a beard coming.
That's all one.
You shall play it in a mask.
And you may speak as small asyou will.
And I may hide my face.
Let me play Thisbe too.
I'll speak in a monstrous littlevoice.
"Thisne, Thisne."
"Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear."
"Thy Thisbe dear, and ladydear."
No, no, no, you must playPyramus,
and, Flute, you Thisbe.
Well, proceed.
Robin Starveling, the tailor.
Here, Peter Quince.
Robin Starveling, you mustplay...
Thisbe's mother.
Tom Snout, the tinker.
Here, Peter Quince.
You, Pyramus' father.
and myself, Thisbe's father.
Oh, and Snug the joiner, you,the lion's part.
And, I hope, here is a playfitted.
Have you the lion's partwritten?
Pray you, if it be, give it me,for I am slow of study.
You may do it extempore, forit's nothing but roaring.
Let me play the lion too.
I will roar that it will do anyman good to hear me.
I will roar that it will makethe duke say,
"Let him roar again. Let himroar again!"
And you should do it tooterribly,
you would fright the duchess andthe ladies that they wouldshriek.
And that were enough to hang usall.
That would hang us, everymother's son.
I grant you, friends,
if you should fright the ladiesout of their wits,
they would have no morediscretion but to hang us,
but I will aggravate my voice sothat I will roar you
as gently as any sucking dove.
I will roar you an 'twere anynightingale.
You can play no part butPyramus,
for Pyramus is a sweet-facedman,
a proper man, as one shall seein a summer's day,
a most lovely gentleman-likeman.
Therefore you must needs playPyramus.
Well, I will undertake it.
Masters, here are your parts.
And I am to entreat you, requestyou, and desire you
to con them by tomorrow night
and meet me in the palace wood,a mile without the town, bymoonlight.
There will we rehearse,
for if we meet in the city, wewill be dogged with company,
and our devices known.
In the meantime, I will draw abill of properties,
such as our play wants.
I pray you, fail me not.
We will meet,
and there we may rehearse mostobscenely and courageously.
Take pains; Be perfect.
Adieu.
Hold or cut bow-strings.
How now, spirit!
Whither wander you?
Over hill, over dale, thoroughbush, thorough brier,
over park, over pale, thoroughflood, thorough fire,
I do wander everywhere swifterthan the moon's sphere.
And I serve the fairy queen, todew her orbs upon the green.
The cowslips tall her pensionersbe.
In their gold coats spots yousee.
Those be rubies, fairy favours.
In those freckles live theirsavours.
I must go seek some dewdropshere
and hang a pearl in everycowslip's ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits.
I'll be gone.
Our queen and all her elves comehere anon.
The king doth keep his revelshere to-night.
Take heed the queen come notwithin his sight,
for Oberon is passing fell andwrath,
because that she as herattendant
hath a lovely boy stolen from anIndian king.
She never had so sweet achangeling.
And jealous Oberon would havethe child knight of his train
to trace the forests wild,
but she perforce withholds theloved boy,
crowns him with flowers andmakes him all her joy.
Either I mistake your shape andmaking quite,
or else you are that shrewd andknavish sprite
called Robin Goodfellow.
Thou speakest aright.
I am that merry wanderer of thenight.
I jest to Oberon and make himsmile
when I a fat and bean-fed horsebeguile,
neighing in likeness of a fillyfoal.
And sometimes lurk I in agossip's bowl,
in very likeness of a roastedcrab.
And when she drinks, against herlips I bob
and on her withered dewlap pourthe ale.
The wisest aunt, telling thesaddest tale,
sometime for three-foot stoolmistaketh me.
Then slip I from her bum.
Down topples she.
But, room, fairy, here comesOberon.
Ill met by moonlight, proudTitania.
What?
Jealous Oberon.
Fairies, skip hence.
I have forsworn his bed andcompany.
Tarry, rash wanton.
Am not I thy lord?
Then I must be thy lady,
but I know when thou hast stolenaway from fairy land
and in the shape of Corin satall day playing on pipes of corn
and versing love to amorousPhillida.
Why art thou here, come from thefarthest steppe of India,
but that, forsooth, the bouncingAmazon,
your buskin'd mistress and yourwarrior love
to Theseus must be wedded,
and you come to give their bedjoy and prosperity.
How canst thou thus for shame,Titania,
glance at my credit withHippolyta,
knowing I know thy love toTheseus?
Didst thou not lead him throughthe glimmering night
from Perigenia, whom heravished?
And make him with fair Aeglebreak his faith,
with Ariadne and Antiopa?
These are the forgeries ofjealousy.
And never, since the middlesummer's spring,
met we on hill, in dale, forestor mead,
by paved fountain or by rushybrook,
or in the beached margent of thesea,
to dance our ringlets to thewhistling wind,
but with thy brawls thou hastdisturbed our sport.
Therefore, the wind, piping tous in vain as in revenge,
have sucked up from the seacontagious fogs,
which falling in the land,
have every pelting river made soproud
that they have overborne theircontinents.
The ox hath therefore stretchedhis yoke in vain,
the ploughman lost his sweat,
and the green corn hath rottedere his youth attained a beard.
The fold stands empty in thedrowned field,
and crows are fatted with themurrion flock.
The nine men's morris is filledup with mud,
and the quaint mazes in thewanton green for lack of tread
are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want theirwinter cheer.
No night is now with hymn orcarol blessed.
Therefore, the moon, thegoverness of floods,
pale in her anger, washes allthe air
that rheumatic diseases doabound.
And thorough this distemperaturewe see the seasons alter,
hoary-headed frosts far in thefresh lap of the crimson rose,
and on old Hiems' thin and icycrown,
an odorous chaplet of sweetsummer buds
is, as in mockery, set.
The spring, the summer, thechilding autumn,
angry winter, change theirwonted liveries,
and the mazed world, by theirincrease,
knows not now which is which.
And this same progeny of evilscomes from our debate,
from our dissension.
We are their parents andoriginal.
Do you amend it then?
It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross herOberon?
I do but beg a little changelingboy to be my henchman.
Set your heart at rest.
The fairy land buys not thechild of me.
His mother was a votaress of myorder.
And, in the spiced Indian air bynight,
full often hath she gossiped bymy side
and sat with me on Neptune'syellow sands,
marking the embarked traders onthe flood
where we have laughed to see thesails
conceive and grow big-belliedwith the wanton wind, which she,
with pretty and with swimminggait following--
her womb then rich with my youngsquire--
would imitate and sail upon theland
to fetch me trifles and returnagain as from a voyage,
rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of thatboy did die.
And for her sake do I rear upher boy.
And for her sake, I will notpart with him.
Give me that boy.
Not for thy fairy kingdom.
Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if Ilonger stay.
Well, go thy way.
Thou shalt not from this grovetill I torment thee for thisinjury.
My gentle Puck, come hither.
Thou rememberest since once Isat upon a promontory
and heard a mermaid on adolphin's back
uttering such dulcet andharmonious breath
that the rude sea grew civil ather song
and certain stars shot madlyfrom their spheres
to hear the sea-maid's music.
I remember.
That very time I saw, but thoucouldst not,
flying between the cold moon andthe earth,
Cupid all armed.
A certain aim he took at a fairvestal throned by the west
and loosed his love-shaftsmartly from his bow
as it should pierce a hundredthousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid'sfiery shaft
quenched in the chaste beams ofthe watery moon,
and the imperial votaress passedon, in maiden meditation,
fancy-free.
Yet marked I where the bolt ofCupid fell.
It fell upon a little westernflower,
before milk-white, now purplewith love's wound.
And maidens call itlove-in-idleness.
Fetch me that flower, the herb Ishewed thee once.
The juice of it on sleepingeyelids laid
will make all man or woman madlydote
upon the next live creature thatit sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thouhere again
ere the leviathan can swim aleague.
I'll put a girdle round aboutthe earth in forty minutes.
Having once this juice,
I'll watch Titania when she isasleep
and drop the liquor of it in hereyes.
The next thing then she wakinglooks upon,
be it on lion, bear, or wolf, orbull,
on meddling monkey, or on busyape,
she shall pursue it with thesoul of love.
And ere I take this charm fromoff her sight,
as I can take it with anotherherb,
I'll make her render up her pageto me.
Who comes here?
I am invisible, and I willoverhear their conference.
Where is Lysander and fairHermia?
Thou toldest me they were stolenunto this wood.
Hence, get thee gone and followme no more.
Do I entice you?
Do I speak you fair?
Or rather, do I not, in plainesttruth,
tell you I do not, nor I cannot,love you?
And even for that do I love youthe more.
I am your spaniel.
And, Demetrius, the more youbeat me,
I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel;spurn me; strike me;
neglect me; lose me.
Only give me leave, unworthy asI am, to follow you.
What worser place can I beg inyour love--
and yet a place of high respectwith me--
than to be used as you use yourdog?
Tempt not too much the hatred ofmy spirit,
for I am sick when I do look onthee.
And I am sick when I look not onyou.
You do impeach your modesty toomuch
to leave the city and commityourself
into the hands of one that lovesyou not,
to trust the opportunity ofnight and the ill counsel of adesert place
with the rich worth of yourvirginity.
Your virtue is my privilege.
For that it is not night when Ido see your face.
Therefore, I think I am not inthe night,
nor doth this wood lack worldsof company,
for you, in my respect, are allthe world.
Then how can it be said I amalone
when all the world is here tolook on me?
I will not stay thy questions.
Let me go.
Or, if thou follow me, do notbelieve
but I shall do thee mischief inthe wood.
Ay, in the temple, in the town,the field, you do me mischief.
Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal onmy sex.
We cannot fight for love as menmay do.
We should be wooed and were notmade to woo.
I'll run from thee, and hide mein the breaks,
and leave thee to the mercy ofwild beasts.
I'll follow thee and make aheaven of hell,
to die upon the hand I love sowell.
Fare thee well, nymph.
Ere he do leave this grove,
thou shalt fly him, and he shallseek thy love.
Hast thou the flower there?
Welcome, wanderer.
Ay, there it is.
I pray thee, give it me.
I know a bank where the wildthyme blows,
where oxlips and the noddingviolet grows
quite over-canopied withluscious woodbine,
with sweet musk-roses and witheglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime ofthe night,
lulled in these flowers withdances and delight.
And there the snake throws herenamelled skin,
weed wide enough to wrap a fairyin.
And with the juice of this, I'llstreak her eyes
and make her full of hatefulfantasies.
Take thou some of it and seekthrough this grove.
A sweet Athenian lady is in lovewith a disdainful youth.
Anoint his eyes,
but do it when the next thing heespies may be the lady.
Thou shalt know the man by theAthenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care,
that he may prove more fond onher
than she upon her love.
Sing me now asleep
then to your offices and let merest.
You spotted snakes with doubletongue.
Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen.
Newts and blind-worms, do nowrong.
Come not near our fairy queen.
Come not near our fairy queen,
our fairy queen.
Philomel, with melody, sing inour sweet lullaby.
Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla,lulla, lullaby.
Never harm, nor spell nor charm,
come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night with lullaby.
So good night
with lullaby, lullaby, lullaby.
Weaving spiders, come not here.
Hence, you long-legged spinners,hence.
Beetles black, approach notnear.
Worm nor snail, do no offense.
Philomel, with melody, sing inour sweet lullaby.
Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla,lulla, lullaby.
Never harm, nor spell nor charm,
come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night with lullaby.
So good night
with lullaby, lullaby, lullaby.
Hence, away.
Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.
What thou seest when thou dostwake,
do it for thy true-love take,
love and languish for his sake,
be it ounce, or cat, or bear,pard,
or boar with bristled hair
in thy eye that shall appearwhen thou wakest,
it is thy dear.
Wake when some vile thing isnear.
Fair love, you faint withwandering in the wood.
And to speak troth, I haveforgot our way.
We'll rest us, Hermia, if youthink it good,
and tarry for the comfort of theday.
Be it so, Lysander.
Find you out a bed, for I uponthis bank will rest my head.
One turf shall serve as pillowfor us both,
one heart, one bed, two bosomsand one troth.
Nay, good Lysander,
for my sake, my dear, liefurther off.
Do not lie so near.
Oh, take the sense, sweet, of myinnocence.
Love takes the meaning in love'sconference.
I mean, that my heart unto yoursis knit
so that one heart we can make ofit,
two bosoms interchained with anoath
so then two bosoms and a singletroth.
Then by your side no bedroom medeny.
For lying so, Hermia, I do notlie.
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners andmy pride
if Hermia meant to say Lysanderlied.
But, gentle friend, for love andcourtesy lie further off.
In human modesty,
such separation as may well besaid
becomes a virtuous bachelor anda maid.
So far be distant.
And, good night, sweet friend.
Thy love ne'er alter till thysweet life end.
Amen, amen to that fair prayer,say I.
So end life when I end loyalty.
Here is my bed.
Sleep give thee all his rest.
With half that wish, thewisher's eyes be pressed.
Through the forest have I gone,
but Athenian found I none onwhose eyes I might approve
this flower's force in stirringlove.
Night and silence.
Who is here?
Weeds of Athens he doth wear.
This is he, my master said,despised the Athenian maid.
And here the maiden sleepingsound on the dank and dirtyground.
Pretty soul,
She durst not lie near thislack-love, this kill-courtesy.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw allthe power this charm doth owe.
When thou wakest, let loveforbid.
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
So awake when I am gone, for Imust now to Oberon.
Stay, though thou kill me, sweetDemetrius.
I charge thee, hence, and do nothaunt me thus.
Oh, wilt thou darkling leave me?
Do not so.
Stay, on thy peril.
I alone will go.
Oh, I am out of breath in thisfond chase.
The more my prayer, the lesseris my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er shelies,
for she hath blessed andattractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright?
Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftenerwashed than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear.
For beasts that meet me run awayfor fear.
Therefore no marvel thoughDemetrius do
as a monster fly my presencethus.
What wicked and dissemblingglass of mine
made me compare with Hermia'ssphery eyne?
But who is here?
Lysander on the ground!
Dead?
Or asleep?
I see no blood, no wound.
Lysander, if you live, good sir,awake.
And run through fire will I forthy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena!
Nature shows art,
that through thy bosom makes mesee thy heart.
Where is Demetrius?
Oh, how fit a word is that vilename to perish on my sword.
Do not say so, Lysander.
Say not so what though he loveyour Hermia?
Lord, what though?
Yet Hermia still loves you, thenbe content.
Content with Hermia.
No, I do repent the tediousminutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven fora dove?
The will of man is by his reasonswayed.
And reason says you are theworthier maid.
Things growing are not ripeuntil their season,
so I, being young, till now ripenot to reason.
And touching now the point ofhuman skill,
reason becomes the marshal to mywill
and leads me to your eyes,
where I o'erlook love's storieswritten in love's richest book.
Wherefore was I to this keenmockery born?
When at your hand did I deservethis scorn?
It's not enough-- it's notenough, young man,
that I did never, no, nor nevercan,
deserve a sweet look fromDemetrius' eye,
but you must flout myinsufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong.
Good sooth, you do, in suchdisdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well.
Perforce, I must confess
I thought you lord of more truegentleness.
Oh, that a lady, of one manrefused
should of another therefore beabused.
She sees not Hermia.
Hermia, sleep thou there
and never mayst thou comeLysander near.
For all my powers, address yourlove and might
to honour Helen and to be herknight.
Ay me, for pity!
What a dream was here.
Lysander, look how I do quakewith fear.
Methought a serpent ate my heartaway
and you sat smiling at his cruelpray.
Lysander?
What, removed?
Lysander!
Lord!
What, out of hearing?
Gone?
No sound,
no word?
Alack, where are you?
Speak, and if you hear,
speak, of all loves.
I swoon almost with fear.
No?
Then I well perceive you are notnigh.
Either death or you I'll findimmediately.
Here's a marvellous convenientplace for our rehearsal.
And we will do it in action aswe will do it before the duke.
Peter Quince.
What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
There are things in this comedyof Pyramus and Thisbe
that will never please.
First, Pyramus must draw a swordto kill himself,
which the ladies cannot abide.
How answer you that?
By'r lakin, a parlous fear.
I believe we must leave thekilling out, when all is done.
Not a whit. I have a device tomake all well.
Write me a prologue.
Let the prologue seem to say
that we will do no harm with ourswords
and that Pyramus is not killedindeed.
And for the more betterassurance,
tell them that I, Pyramus, amnot Pyramus,
but Bottom the weaver.
This will put them out of fear.
Well, we will have such aprologue,
and it shall be written in eightand six.
No, let it be two more.
Let it be written in eight andeight.
Will the ladies not be afeard ofthe lion?
I fear it, I promise you.
Masters, you ought to considerwith yourselves.
To bring in-- God shield us--
a lion among ladies is a mostdreadful thing,
for there is not a more fearfulwild-fowl than your lion living.
And we ought to look to it.
Therefore, another prologueshould tell it that he's not alion.
Nay, you must name his name.
And half his face must be seenthrough the lion's neck.
And he himself must speakthrough
saying thus, or to the samedefect,
"Ladies,"--or "Fair ladies"--
"I would wish you,"-- or "Iwould request you"--
or "I would--
Entreat you.
"I would entreat you not tofear,
"not to tremble my life foryours.
"If you think I come hither as alion, "it were pity of my life.
"No, I am no such thing.
I am a man as other men are."
And there indeed let him namehis name
and tell them plainly he is Snugthe joiner.
Well, it shall be so.
But there is two hard things.
That is, to bring the moonlightinto a chamber,
for Pyramus and Thisbe you knowmeet by moonlight.
Doth the moon shine that nightwe play our play?
A calendar, a calendar.
Look in the almanac.
Find out moonshine.
Yes, it doth shine that night.
Why, then, may you leave acasement
of the great chamber window,where we play, open,
and the moon may shine in at thecasement.
Ay, or else one must come in
with a bush of thorns and alantern,
and say he comes to disfigure,or to present,
the person of moonshine.
And there is another thing.
We must have a wall in the greatchamber,
for Pyramus and Thisbe, says thestory,
did talk through the chink of awall.
You can never bring in a wall.
What say you, Bottom?
Some man or other must presentwall,
and let him have some plaster orsome loam
or some rough-cast about him tosignify wall.
And let him hold his fingersthus,
and through that cranny shallPyramus and Thisbe whisper.
If that may be, then all iswell.
Come, sit down, every mother'sson, and rehearse your parts.
Now, Pyramus, you begin.
When you have spoken yourspeech,
enter into that brake,
and so every one according tohis cue.
What hempen home-spuns have weswaggering here
so near the cradle of the fairyqueen?
What, a play toward.
I'll be an auditor, an actortoo, perhaps,
if I see cause.
Speak, Pyramus.
Thisbe, stand forth.
Thisbe, the flowers of odioussavours sweet--
Odious--Odorous!
Odorous savors sweet,
so hath thy breath, my dearestThisbe dear.
But hark, a voice.
Stay thou but here awhile,
and by and by I will to theeappear.
A stranger Pyramus than e'erplayed here.
Must I speak now?
Ay, marry, must you, for youmust understand
he goes but to see a noise thathe heard
and is to come again.
Oh, most radiant Pyramus, mostlily-white of hue,
of colour like the red rose ontriumphant brier,
most brisky juvenal and eke mostlovely Jew,
as true as truest horse that yetwould never tire,
I'll meet thee, Pyramus, atNinny's tomb.
"Ninus' tomb," man.
Why, you mustn't speak that yet,that you answer to Pyramus.
You speak all your part at once,cues and all.
Pyramus, enter.
Your cue is past.
It is, "never tire."
Oh, as true as truest horse,that yet would never tire.
If I were fair, fair Thisbe, Iwere only thine.
Oh, monstrous.
Oh, strange.
We are haunted.
Pray, masters.
Fly, masters!
Help!
I'll follow you. I'll lead youabout, around,
through bog, through bush,through brake, through brier.
Sometime a horse I'll be,sometime a hound,
a hog, a headless bear,sometimes a fire
and neigh, and bark, and grunt,and roar, and burn,
like horse, hound, hog, bear,fire, at every turn.
I see their knavery.
This is to make an ass of me, tofright me if they could.
But I will not stir from thisplace, do what they can.
I will walk up and down here,and I will sing,
that they shall hear I am notafraid.
The ousel cock so black of huewith orange-tawny bill.
The throstle with his note sotrue.
The wren with little quill--
The finch, the sparrow and thelark.
What angel wakes me from myflowery bed?
A plain-song cuckoo gray,
whose note full many a man dothmark,
and dares not answer nay.
For, indeed, who would set hiswit to so foolish a bird?
Who would give a bird the lie,though it cry "cuckoo" never so?
I pray thee, gentle mortal, singagain.
Mine ear is much enamoured ofthy note.
So is mine eye enthralled to thyshape.
And thy fair virtue's force
perforce doth move me on thefirst view
to say, to swear,
I love thee.
Methinks, mistress, you shouldhave little reason for that.
And yet, to say the truth,
reason and love keep littlecompany together nowadays.
The more the pity that somehonest neighbours
will not make them friends.
Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.
Thou art as wise as thou artbeautiful.
Not so, neither,
but if I had wit enough to getout of this wood,
I have enough to serve mine ownturn.
Out of this wood do not desireto go.
Thou shalt remain here, whetherthou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend uponmy state.
And I do love thee.
Therefore, go with me.
I'll give thee fairies to attendon thee,
and they shall fetch thee jewelsfrom the deep
and sing whilst thou on pressedflowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortalgrossness
so that thou shalt like an airyspirit go.
Peaseblossom, Cobweb,
Moth, and Mustardseed.
- Ready. - And I.
- And I. - And I.
Where shall we go?
Be kind and courteous to thisgentleman.
Hop in his walks and gambol inhis eyes.
Feed him with apricocks anddewberries,
with purple grapes, green figs,and mulberries.
The honey-bags steal from thehumble-bee.
And for night-tapers, crop theirwaxen thighs
and light them at the fieryglow-worm's eyes,
to have my love to bed and toarise.
And pluck the wings from paintedbutterflies
to fan the moonbeams from hissleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do himcourtesies.
- Hail. - Hail.
I cry your worship's mercy,heartily.
I beseech your worship's name.
Cobweb.
I shall desire you of moreacquaintance,
good Master Cobweb.
If I cut my finger, I shall makebold with you.
Your name, honest gentleman?
Peaseblossom.
Good Master Peaseblossom,
I shall desire you of moreacquaintance too.
Your name, I beseech you, sir?
Mustardseed.
Good Master Mustardseed,
Your kindred had made my eyeswater ere now.
I desire your more acquaintance,good Master Mustardseed.
Come, wait upon him.
Lead him to my bower.
The moon methinks looks with awatery eye.
And when she weeps, weeps everylittle flower,
lamenting some enforcedchastity.
Tie up my love's tongue.
Bring him silently.
How now, mad spirit!
What night-rule now about thishaunted grove?
My mistress with a monster is inlove.
This falls out better than Icould devise.
Oh, why rebuke you him thatloves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on yourbitter foe.
Now I but chide, but I shoulduse thee worse.
For thou, I fear, hast given mecause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander inhis sleep,
being o'er shoes in blood,
plunge in the deep and kill metoo.
The sun was not so true unto theday as he to me.
Would he have stolen away fromsleeping Hermia?
I'll believe as soon this wholeearth may be bored
and that the moon may throughthe centre creep
and so displease her brother'snoontide with the Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hastmurdered him.
So should a murderer look, sodead, so grim.
So should the murdered look andso should I,
pierced through the heart withyour stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look asbright, as clear
as yonder Venus in herglimmering sphere.
What's this to my Lysander?
Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thougive him me?
I had rather give his carcass tomy hounds.
Out, dog.
Out, cur.
Thou drivest me past the boundsof maiden's patience.
Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never numberedamong men.
Oh, once tell true, tell true,even for my sake.
Durst thou have looked upon himbeing awake,
and hast thou killed himsleeping?
Oh, brave touch.
Could not a worm, an adder, doso much?
An adder did it,
for with doubler tongue thanthine, thou serpent, never adderstung.
You spend your passion on amisprised mood.
I am not guilty of Lysander'sblood,
nor is he dead, for aught that Ican tell.
I pray thee, tell me then thathe is well.
If I could, what should I gettherefore?
A privilege never to see memore.
And from thy hated presence partI so.
See me no more, whether he bedead or no.
ierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while Iwill remain.
What hast thou done?
Thou hast mistaken quite andlaid the love-juice
on some true-love's sight.
Of thy misprision must perforceensue.
Some true love turned and not afalse turned true.
Then fate o'er-rules, that, oneman holding troth,
a million fail, confounding oathon oath.
About the wood go swifter thanthe wind
and Helena of Athens look thoufind.
All fancy-sick she is and paleof cheer,
with sighs of love that coststhe fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bringher here.
I'll charm his eyes against shedo appear.
I go. I go.
Look how I go, swifter thanarrow from the Tartar's bow.
Flower of this purple dye hitwith Cupid's archery,
Sink in apple of his eye.
When his love he doth espy,
let her shine as gloriously asthe Venus of the sky.
When thou wakest, if she be by,
beg of her for remedy.
Captain of our fairy band,Helena is here at hand,
and the youth, mistook by me,pleading for a lover's fee.
Shall we their fond pageant see?
Lord, what fools these mortalsbe.
Draw aside: the noise they makewill cause Demetrius to awake.
Then will two at once woo one.
That must needs be sport alone.
And those things do best pleaseme that befall preposterously.
Why should you think that Ishould woo in scorn?
Scorn and derision never come intears.
Look, when I vow, I weep.
And vows so born, in theirnativity,
all truth appears.
How can these things in me seemscorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith toprove them true?
You do advance your cunning moreand more.
These vows are Hermia's.
Will you give her o'er?
I had no judgment when to her Iswore.
Nor none, in my mind, now yougive her o'er.
Demetrius loves her and lovesnot you.
Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect,divine.
To what, my love, shall Icompare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy.
Oh, how ripe in show thy lips,those kissing cherries,
tempting grow.
Oh, spite.
Pure congealed white, highTaurus snow,
Fanned with the eastern wind,
turns to a crow when thouholdest up thy hand.
I see you all are bent to setagainst me for your merriment.
You are unkind, Demetrius.
Be not so, for you love Hermia.
If you were civil, you would notdo me this much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I knowyou do?
But you must join in souls tomock me too?
You love Hermia.
This you know I know.
And here, with all my good will,with all my heart,
In Hermia's love, I yield you upmy part.
To vow and swear and superpraisemy parts
when I am sure you hate me withyour hearts.
You both are rivals and loveHermia.
In Hermia's love, I yield you upmy part.
And yours of Helena to mebequeath,
And now both rivals to mockHelena.
Whom I do love and will do tillmy death.
A trim exploit,
a manly enterprise to conjuretears up
in a poor maid's eyes with yourderision.
If e'er I loved her, all thatlove is gone.
Dark night, that from the eyehis function takes,
the ear more quick ofapprehension makes.
And now to Helen, is it homereturned.
There to remain.
Helen, it is not so.
Never did mockers waste moreidle breath.
Thou art not by mine eye,Lysander, found.
Mine ear, I thank it, brought meto thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thouleave me so?
Why should he stay, whom lovedoth press to go?
What love could press Lysanderfrom my side?
Lysander's love, that would notlet him bide,
fair Helena, who more engildsthe night
Than all you fiery oes and eyesof light.
Why seekest thou me?
Could not this make thee know
the hate I bear thee made meleave thee so?
Lo, she is one of thisconfederacy
Now I perceive they haveconjoined all three
to fashion this false sport inspite of me.
Injurious Hermia,
most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have youwith these contrived
to bait me with this foulderision?
Is all the counsel that we twohave shared,
the sisters' vows, the hoursthat we have spent,
when we have chid thehasty-footed time for partingus.
Oh, is all forgot--
All school-days' friendship,childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, have like twoartificial gods,
have with our needles createdboth one flower,
both on one sampler, sitting onone cushion,
both warbling of one song, bothin one key,
as if our hands, our sides,
voices and minds, had beenincorporate.
So we grew together, like...
to a double cherry,
seeming parted, but yet an unionin partition,
two lovely berries moulded onone stem,
so, with two seeming bodies, butone heart,
And will you rent our ancientlove asunder,
to join with men in scorningyour poor friend?
It is not friendly.
'Tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chideyou for it,
though I alone do feel theinjury.
I am amazed at your passionatewords.
I scorn you not.
It seems that you scorn me.
Have you not set Lysander, as inscorn,
to follow me and praise my eyesand face?
And made your other love,Demetrius,
who even but now did spurn mewith his foot,
to call me goddess, nymph,divine and rare,
precious, celestial?
Wherefore speaks he this to herhe hates?
And wherefore doth Lysander denyyour love,
so rich within his soul,
and tender me, forsooth,affection,
but by your setting on by yourconsent?
What though I be not so in graceas you,
so hung upon with love, sofortunate,
but miserable most, to loveunloved?
This you should pity rather thandespise.
I understand not what you meanby this.
Ay, do, persever, counterfeitsad looks,
make mouths upon me when I turnmy back,
wink each at other, hold thesweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shallbe chronicled.
If you had any pity, grace, ormanners,
you would not make me such anargument.
But fare ye well.
No, stay, gentle Helena.
'Tis partly my own fault--
Hear my excuse.
Which death or absence soonshall remedy.
My life, my love, my soul, fairHelena.
Oh, excellent.
Sweet, do not scorn her so.
If she cannot entreat, I cancompel.
Thou canst compel no more thanshe entreat.
Thy threats have no morestrength than her weak prayers.
Helen, I love thee, by my life,I do.
I swear by that which I willlose for thee
to prove him false that says Ilove thee not.
I say I love thee more than hecan do.
If thou say so, withdraw, andprove it too.
Quick, come!
Lysander, whereto tends allthis?
Away, you Ethiope.
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr.
Vile thing, let loose, or I willshake thee from me like aserpent.
Thy love--Ha!
Out, tawny Tartar, out!
You loathed medicine, hatedpotion, hence!
Do you not jest?
Yes, sooth, and so do you.
You're a tame man.
Go.
Demetrius, I will keep my wordwith thee.
I would I had your bond, for Iperceive a weak bond holds you.
I'll not trust your word.
What, should I hurt her, strikeher, kill her dead?
No, although I hate her, I'llnot harm her so.
What, can you do me greater harmthan hate?
Hate me?
Wherefore?
Oh me, what news, my love.
Am not I Hermia?
Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I waserewhile.
Since night you loved me, yetsince night you left me.
Why, then you left me-- oh, thegods forbid--
in earnest, shall I say?
Ay, by my life, and never diddesire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, ofquestion, of doubt.
Be certain, nothing truer: 'tisno jest that I do hate thee
and love Helena.
Oh, me.
You juggler.
You canker-blossom.
You thief of love!
What, have you come by night andstolen my love's heart from him?
What, will you tear impatientanswers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie.
You counterfeit, you puppet,you.
Puppet?
Why so?
Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hathmade compare between ourstatures.
She hath urged her height, andwith her personage,
her tall personage, her height,forsooth,
she hath prevailed with him.
I pray you, though you mock me,gentlemen,
let her not hurt me.
And are you grown so high in hisesteem
because I am so--
dwarfish--
And so low?
I was never cursed.
I have no gift at all inshrewishness.
How low am I, thou paintedmaypole?
Speak.
How low am I?
I am a right maid for mycowardice.
I am not yet so low but that mynails can reach unto thine eyes.
Let her not strike me.
You perhaps may think becauseshe is something
lower than myself that I canmatch her.
Lower! Hark, again.
Good Hermia, do not be so bitterwith me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia,did ever keep your counsels,
never wronged you.
Save that, in love untoDemetrius,
I told him of your stealth untothis wood.
AAHH!
He followed you.
For love, I followed him,
but he hath chid me hence andthreatened me
to spurn me, strike me, nay, tokill me too.
And now, so you will let mequiet go.
To Athens will I bear my follyback and follow you no further.
Let me go.
You see how simple and how fondI am.
Why, get you gone.
Who is it that hinders you?
A foolish heart that I leavehere behind.
What, with Lysander?
No, with Demetrius.
Ooh, when she's angry, she iskeen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went toschool,
and though she be but little,she is fierce.
"Little" again.
Nothing but "low" and "little."
Why will you suffer her to floutme thus?
Let me come to her.
Get you gone, you dwarf,
you minimus of hinderingknot-grass made,
you bead, you acorn!
Let her alone.
Speak not of Helena.
Take not her part.
For, if thou dost intend neverso little show of love to her,
thou shalt aby it.
Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou darest, totry whose right
of thine or mine, is most inHelena.
Follow?
Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek byjowl.
You, mistress, all this coil islong of you.
I will not trust you, I,
nor longer stay in your cursedcompany.
Your hands than mine are quickerfor a fray.
My legs are longer though, torun away.
I am amazed and know not what tosay.
This is thy negligence stillthou mistakest
or else committest thy knaverieswillfully.
Believe me, king of shadows, Imistook.
Did not you tell me I shouldknow the man
by the Athenian garments he hadon?
And so far blameless proves myenterprise
that I have 'nointed anAthenian's eyes.
And so far, am I glad it so didsort
as this their jangling I esteema sport.
Thou seest these lovers seek aplace to fight.
Hie therefore, Robin, overcastthe night.
The starry welkin cover
thou anon with drooping fog asblack as Acheron
and lead these testy rivals soastray
as one come not within another'sway.
Like to Lysander sometime framethy tongue.
Then stir Demetrius upwithbitter wrong.
And sometime rail thou likeDemetrius.
And from each other look thoulead them thus,
till o'er their browsdeath-counterfeiting sleep
with leaden legs and batty wingsdoth creep,
Then crush this herb intoLysander's eye,
whose liquor hath this virtuousproperty
to take from thence all errorwith his might
and make his eyeballs roll withwonted sight.
When they next wake, all thisderision
shall seem a dream and fruitlessvision
and back to Athens shall thelovers wend,
with league whose date tilldeath shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do theeemploy,
I'll to my queen and beg herIndian boy.
And then I will her charmed eyerelease
from monster's view,
and all things shall be peace.
My fairy lord, this must be donewith haste,
for night's swift dragons cutthe clouds full fast,
and yonder shines Aurora'sharbinger
at whose approach ghostswandering here and there
troop home to churchyards,damned spirits
that in crossways and floodshave burial,
already to their wormy beds aregone.
For fear lest day should looktheir shames upon,
they willfully themselves exilefrom light
and must for aye consort withblack-browed night.
But we are spirits of anothersort.
I with the morning's love haveoft made sport.
And, like the forester, thegroves may tread
even till the eastern gate, allfiery-red,
opening on Neptune with fairblessed beams,
turns into yellow gold his saltgreen streams.
But, notwithstanding, haste.
Make no delay.
We may effect this business yetere day.
Up and down, up and down, I willlead them up and down.
I am feared in field and town.
Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.
Where art thou now, proudDemetrius?
Speak thou now.
Here, villain.
Drawn and ready.
Where art thou?
I will be with thee straight.
Follow me, then, to plainerground.
Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, artthou fled?
Speak!
In some bush?
Where dost thou hide thy head?
Thou coward, art thou braggingto the stars,
telling the bushes that thoulookest for wars
and wilt not come?
Come, recreant; Come, thouchild.
I'll whip thee with a rod.
He is defiled that draws a swordon thee.
Yea, art thou there?
Follow my voice.
We'll try no manhood here.
He goes before me and stilldares me on.
When I come where he calls, thenhe is gone.
The villain is muchlighter-heeled than I.
I followed fast, but faster hedid fly,
that fallen am I in dark unevenway
and here will rest me.
Come, thou gentle day.
For if but once thou show me thygrey light,
I'll find Demetrius and revengethis spite.
Ho, ho, ho!
Coward, why comest thou not?
Abide me, if thou darest, forwell I wot.
Thou runnest before me, shiftingevery place
and darest not stand nor look mein the face.
Where art thou now?
Come hither; I am here.
Nay, then, thou mockest me.
Thou shalt buy this dear if everI thy face by daylight see:
Now go thy way.
Faintness constraineth me
to measure out my length on thiscold bed.
Oh weary night,
Oh long and tedious night.
Abate thy hours.
Shine comforts from the east
that I may back to Athens bydaylight
from these that my poor companydetest.
And sleep, that sometimes shutsup sorrow's eye,
steal me awhile from mine owncompany.
Yet but three?
Come one more.
Two of both kinds makes up four.
Here she comes, curst and sad.
Cupid is a knavish lad thus tomake poor females mad.
Never so weary, never so in woe.
Bedabbled with the dew and tornwith briers,
I can no further crawl, nofurther go.
My legs can keep no pace with mydesires.
Here will I rest me till thebreak of day.
Heavens shield Lysander if theymean a fray.
On the ground, sleep sound.
I'll apply to your eye, gentlelover, remedy.
When thou wakest, thou takesttrue delight
in the sight of thy formerlady's eye.
And the country proverb known
that every man should take hisown
in your waking shall be shown.
Jack shall have Jill.
Nought shall go ill.
The man shall have his mareagain, and all shall be well.
Jack shall have Jill.
Nought shall go ill.
The man shall have his mareagain,
and all shall be well.
Where's Peaseblossom?
Ready.
Scratch my head, Peaseblossom.
Come, sit thee down upon thisflowery bed
while I thy amiable cheeks docoy
and stick musk-roses in thysleek, smooth head
and kiss thy fair, large ears,my gentle joy.
Where's Mounsieur Cobweb?
Ready.
Mounsieur Cobweb, goodmounsieur,
get you your weapons in yourhand
and kill me a red-hippedhumble-bee
on the top of a thistle.
And, good mounsieur, bring methe honey-bag.
Don't fret yourself too much inthe action, mounsieur.
And, good mounsieur, have a carethe honey-bag break not.
I would be loath to have youoverflown
with a honey-bag, signior.
Where's Mounsieur Mustardseed?
Ready.
Give me your neaf, MounsieurMustardseed.
Pray you, leave your courtesy,good mounsieur.
What's your Will?
Nothing, good mounsieur, but tohelp Cavalery Cobweb to scratch.
I must to the barber's,monsieur,
for methinks I am marvelloushairy about the face.
And I am such a tender ass,
if my hair do but tickle me, Imust scratch.
What, wilt thou hear some music,my sweet love?
I have a reasonable good ear inmusic.
Let's have the tongs and thebones.
Or say, sweet love, what thoudesirest to eat.
Truly, a peck of provender.
I could munch your good dryoats.
Methinks I have a great desireto a bottle of hay.
Good hay, sweet hay, hath nofellow.
I have a venturous fairy
that shall seek the squirrel'shoard and fetch thee new nuts.
I had rather have a handful ortwo of dried peas.
But let none of your people stirme.
I have an exposition of sleepcome upon me.
Sleep thou, and I will wind theein my arms.
Fairies, away, and be all waysaway.
So doth the woodbine the sweethoneysuckle gently entwist.
The female ivy so enrings thebarky fingers of the elm.
Oh, how I love thee.
Oh, how I dote on thee.
See'st thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin topity.
For, meeting her of late behindthe wood
seeking sweet favours for thishateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall outwith her.
For she his hairy temples
then had rounded with a coronetof fresh and fragrant flowers.
And that same dew, whichsometime on the buds
was wont to swell like round andorient pearls
stood now within the prettyflowerets' eyes
like tears that did their owndisgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasuretaunted her
and she in mild terms begged mypatience,
I then did ask of her herchangeling child,
which straight she gave me.
And her fairy sent to bear himto my bower in fairy land.
And now I have the boy,
I will undo this hatefulimperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take thistransformed scalp
from off the head of thisAthenian swain.
That, he awaking when the otherdo,
may all to Athens back againrepair
and think no more of thisnight's accidents
but as the fierce vexation of adream.
But first, I will release thefairy queen.
Be as thou wast wont to be.
See as thou wast wont to see.
Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
hath such force and blessedpower.
Now, my Titania,
wake you, my sweet queen.
My Oberon.
What visions have I seen.
Methought I was enamoured of anass.
There lies your love.
How came these things to pass?
Oh, how mine eyes do loathe hisvisage now.
Silence awhile.
Robin, take off this head.
Titania, music call.
Music, music, such as charmethsleep.
Now, when thou wakest, withthine own fool's eyes peep.
Sound, music.
Come, my queen, take hands withme
and rock the ground whereonthese sleepers be.
Now thou and I are new in amity,
and will to-morrow midnightsolemnly dance
in Duke Theseus' housetriumphantly
and bless it to all fairprosperity.
There shall the pairs offaithful lovers be wedded
with Theseus all in jollity.
Fairy king, attend, and mark.
I do hear the morning lark.
Then, my queen, in silence sad,
trip we after night's shade.
We the globe can compass soonswifter than the wandering moon.
Come, my lord, and in ourflight,
tell me how it came this nightthat I sleeping here was found
with these mortals on theground.
I was with Hercules and Cadmusonce,
when in a wood of Crete,
they bayed the bear with houndsof Sparta.
Never did I hear such gallantchiding.
For besides the groves, theskies, the fountains,
every region near seemed all onemutual cry.
I never heard so musical adiscord, such sweet thunder.
Good morrow, friends.
Saint Valentine is passed.
Begin these wood-birds but tocouple now?
But speak, Egeus,
is this not the day
that Hermia should give answerof her choice.
It is, my Lord.
I pray, all, stand up.
I know you two are rivalenemies.
How comes this gentle concord inthe world,
that hatred is so far fromjealousy
to sleep by hate and fear noenmity?
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,half sleep, half waking,
but as yet, I swear, I cannottruly say how I came here.
But, as I think--
for truly would I speak, and nowdo I bethink me, so it is--
I came hither with Hermia.
Our intent was to be gone fromAthens,
where we might, without theperil of the Athenian law--
Enough, enough, my lord.
You have enough.
I beg the law, the law upon hishead.
They would have stolen away.
They would, Demetrius,
thereby to have defeated you andme,
you of your wife, and me of myconsent,
of my consent that she should beyour wife.
My lord, fair Helen told me oftheir stealth,
of this their purpose hither tothis wood.
And I, in fury, hither followedthem,
fair Helena, in fancy, followingme.
But, my good lord, I wot not bywhat power--
but by some power it is--
my love to Hermia, melted as thesnow,
seems to me now as theremembrance of an idle gaud
which in my childhood I did doteupon.
All the faith, the virtue of myheart,
the object and the pleasure ofmine eye is only Helena.
To her, my lord, was I betrothedere I saw Hermia.
But, like in sickness, did Iloathe this food.
But, as in health, come to mynatural taste.
Now I do wish it, love it, longfor it,
and will, for evermore, be trueto it.
Egeus, I will overbear yourwill.
For in the temple by and by withus
these couples shall eternally beknit.
These things seem small andindistinguishable,
like far off mountains turnedinto clouds.
Methinks I see these things withparted eye
when everything seems double.
So methinks, and I have foundDemetrius like a jewel,
mine own, and not mine own.
Are you sure that we are awake?
It seems to me that yet wesleep, we dream.
Do not you think The duke washere, and bid us follow him?
Yea, and my father.
And Hippolyta.
And he bid us follow to thetemple.
Why, then, we are awake.
Let's follow him and by the waylet us recount our dream.
When my cue comes, call me, andI will answer.
My next is, "Most fair Pyramus."
Heigh-ho, Peter Quince.
Flute, the bellows-mender.
Snout, the tinker.
Starveling.
God's my life, stolen hence, andleft me asleep.
I have had a most rare vision.
I have had a dream, past the witof man to say what dream it was.
Man is but an ass if he go aboutto expound this dream.
Methought I was-- there is noman can tell what.
Methought I was-- and methoughtI had--
but man is but a patched fool,
if he will offer to say whatmethought I had.
The eye of man hath not heard.
The ear of man hath not seen.
Man's hand is not able to taste,his tongue to conceive,
nor his heart to report what mydream was.
I will get Peter Quince to writea ballad of this dream.
It shall be called Bottom'sDream,
because it hath no bottom.
And I will sing it in the latterend of a play
before the duke.
Peradventure, to make it themore gracious,
I shall sing it at her death.
'Tis strange my Theseus, thatthese lovers speak of.
More strange than true.
I never may believe theseantique fables,
nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have suchseething brains,
such shaping fantasies
that apprehend more than coolreason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and thepoet
are of imagination all compact.
One sees more devils than vasthell can hold.
That is the madman.
The lover, all as frantic,
sees Helen's beauty in a brow ofEgypt.
The poet's eye, in a fine frenzyrolling
doth glance from heaven toearth, from earth to heaven
and as imagination bodies forththe forms of things unknown.
The poet's pen turns them toshapes
and gives to airy nothing alocal habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strongimagination
that if it would but apprehendsome joy,
it comprehends some bringer ofthat joy.
Or in the night, imagining somefear,
how easy is a bush supposed abear.
But all the story of the nighttold over,
and all their minds transfiguredso together,
more witnesseth than fancy'simages
and grows to something of greatconstancy,
but, howsoever, strange andadmirable.
Have you sent to Bottom's house?
Is he come home yet?
He cannot be heard of.
Out of doubt, he is transported.
If he come not, then the play ismarred.
It goes not forward, doth it?
It is not possible.
You have not a man in all Athens
able to discharge Pyramus buthe.
No, he hath simply the best witof any handicraft man in Athens.
Yea.
And the best person too.
And he is a very paramour for asweet voice.
You must say "paragon."
A paramour is, God bless us, athing of naught.
Masters, the duke is coming fromthe temple,
and there is two or three lordsand ladies more married.
If our sport had gone forward,we had all been made men.
Oh, sweet bully Bottom.
Thus hath he lost sixpence a dayduring his life.
He could not have 'scapedsixpence a day.
An the duke had not given himsixpence a day
for playing Pyramus, I'll behanged.
He would have deserved it.
Sixpence a day in Pyramus ornothing.
Where are these lads?
Where are these hearts?
Bottom?
Bottom!
Oh, most courageous day.
Oh, most happy hour.
Masters, I am to discoursewonders,
but ask me not what, for if Itell you, I am no true Athenian.
I will tell you every thing,right as it fell out.
Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
Not a word of me.
All that I will tell you is thatthe duke hath dined.
Get your apparel together, goodstrings to your beards,
new ribbons to your pumps.
Meet presently at the palace.
Every man look o'er his part.
For the short and the long is,
our play is preferred!
In any case, let Thisbe haveclean linen,
and let not him that plays thelion pair his nails,
for they shall hang out for thelion's claws.
And, most dear actors, eat noonions nor garlic,
for we are to utter sweetbreath,
and I do not doubt but to hearthem say
it is a sweet comedy.
No more words: away!
Go, away.
Come now, what masques, whatdances shall we have
to wear away the long age ofthree hours
between our after-supper andbed-time?
Where is our usual manager ofmirth?
What revels are in hand?
Is there no play to ease theanguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.
Here, mighty Theseus.
Say, what abridgement have youfor this evening?
What masque?
What music?
How shall we beguile the lazytime, if not with some delight?
There is a brief how many sportsare ripe.
Make choice of which yourhighness will see first.
"The battle with the Centaurs
to be sung By an Athenian eunuchto the harp."
We'll none of that.
That have I told my love inglory of my kinsman Hercules.
"The riot of the tipsyBacchanals
tearing the Thracian singer intheir rage."
That is an old device, and itwas played
when I from Thebes came last aconqueror.
"The thrice three muses mourningfor the death of learning,
late deceased in beggary."
That is some satire, keen andcritical,
not sorting with a nuptialceremony.
"A tedious brief scene of youngPyramus and his love Thisbe,
very tragical mirth."
Merry and tragical.
Tedious and brief.
That is, hot ice and wondrousstrange snow.
How shall we find the concord ofthis discord?
A play there is, my lord, someten words long,
which is as brief as I haveknown a play.
But by ten words, my lord, it istoo long,
which makes it tedious.
For in all the play, there isnot one word apt,
one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, itis.
For Pyramus therein doth killhimself.
Which, when I saw rehearsed,
I must confess made mine eyeswater,
but more merry tears the passionof loud laughter never shed.
What are they that do play it?
Hard-handed men that work inAthens here,
which never laboured in theirminds till now
and now have toiled theirunbreathed memories
with this same play against yournuptial.
And we will hear it.
No, my noble lord.
It is not for you.
I have heard it over, and it isnothing, nothing in the world.
Unless you can find sport intheir intents,
extremely stretched and connedwith cruel pain
to do you service.
I will hear that play, for neveranything can be amiss
when simpleness and duty tenderit.
Go, bring them in.
I love not to see wretchednesso'er charged
and duty in his serviceperishing.
Why, gentle sweet, you shall seeno such thing.
He says they can do nothing inthis kind.
The kinder we, to give themthanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take whatthey mistake.
And what poor duty cannot do,
noble respect takes it in might,not merit.
Where I have come, great clerkshave purposed
to greet me with premeditatedwelcomes
where I have seen them shiverand look pale,
make periods in the midst ofsentences,
throttle their practised accentsin their fears,
and in conclusion, dumbly havebroke off,
not paying me a welcome.
Trust me, sweet, out of thissilence yet I picked a welcome.
And in the modesty of fearfulduty,
I read as much as in therattling tongue
of saucy and audaciouseloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tiedsimplicity
in least speak most to mycapacity.
So please your grace, thePrologue is addressed.
Let him approach.
If we offend, it is with ourgood will.
That you should think we comenot to offend,
but with good will
to show our simple skill.
Th--
That is the true beginning ofour end.
Consider then we come but indespite.
We do not come as minding tocontent you.
Our true intent is all for yourdelight.
We are not here that you shouldhere repent you,
The actors are at hand, and bytheir show,
you shall know all that you arelike to know.
Gentles, perchance you wonder atthis show.
But wonder on, till truth makeall things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if youwould know.
This beauteous lady Thisbe iscertain.
This man, with lime andrough-cast,
doth present Wall,
that vile wall which did theselovers sunder.
And through Wall's chink, poorsouls,
they are content to whisper.
At the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lantern, dog, andbush of thorn,
presenteth Moonshine;
For, if you will know, bymoonshine
did these lovers think no scornto meet at Ninus' tomb,
there, there to woo.
This grisly beast, which Lionhight by name,
the trusty Thisbe, coming firstby night,
did scare away, or rather didaffright.
And, as she fled, her mantle shedid fall,
which Lion vile with bloodymouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youthand tall
and finds his trusty Thisbe'smantle slain.
Whereat, with blade, withbloody, blameful blade,
he bravely broached his boiling,bloody breast.
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberryshade,
his dagger drew and died.
For all the rest, let Lion,Moonshine, Wall,
and lovers twain at largediscourse
while here they do remain.
In this same interlude, it dothbefall that I,
one Snout by name, present awall.
And such a wall, as I will haveyou think,
that had in it a crannied holeor chink
through which the lovers,Pyramus and Thisbe,
did whisper often very secretly.
This loam, this rough-cast andthis stone
doth show that I am that samewall.
The truth is so, and this thecranny is,
right and sinister,
through which the fearful loversare to whisper.
Oh, grim-looked night.
Oh, night with hue so black.
Oh, night, which ever art whenday is not.
Oh, night, Oh, night.
Alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisbe's promise isforgot.
And thou, oh, wall, oh sweet,oh, lovely wall
that standest between herfather's ground and mine.
Thou wall, oh, wall, oh, sweetand lovely wall,
show me thy chink, to blinkthrough with mine eyne.
Thanks, courteous wall.
Jove shield thee well for this.
But what see I?
No Thisbe do I see.
Oh, wicked wall, through whom Isee no bliss.
Cursed be thy stones for thusdeceiving me.
The wall, methinks, beingsensible, should curse again.
No, in truth, sir, he shouldnot.
"Deceiving me" is Thisbe's cue.
She is to enter now, and I am tospy her through the wall.
You shall see, it will fall patas I told you.
Oh, wall, full often hast thouheard my moans
for parting my fair Pyramus andme.
My cherry lips have often kissedthy stones,
thy stones with lime and hairknit up in thee.
I see a voice.
Now will I to the chink to spy.
An I can hear my Thisbe's face.
Thisbe.
My love, thou art my love, Ithink.
Think what thou wilt.
I am thy lover's grace.
And, like Limander, am I trustystill.
And I like Helen, till the Fatesme kill.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was sotrue.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I toyou.
Oh, kiss me through the hole ofthis vile wall.
I kiss the wall's hole, not yourlips at all.
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meetme straightway?
'Tide life, 'tide death, I comewithout delay.
Thus have I, Wall, my partdischarged so.
And, being done, thus Wall awaydoth go.
This is the silliest stuff thatever I heard.
The best in this kind are butshadows.
And the worst are no worse ifimagination amend them.
It must be your imaginationthen, and not theirs.
If we imagine no worse of themthan they of themselves,
they may pass for excellent men.
Ladies, you whose gentle hearts
do fear the smallest monstrousmouse that creeps on floor
may now perchance both quake andtremble here
when lion rough in wildest ragedoth roar.
Then know that I, one Snug thejoiner,
am a lion-fell, nor else nolion's dam;.
For, if I should as Lion
come in strife into your place,
'twere pity on my life.
A very gentle beast of a goodconscience.
Let us listen to the moon.
This lantern doth the hornedmoon,
the horned moon present.
Myself the man in the moon doseem to be.
This is the greatest error ofall the rest.
The man should be put into thelantern.
How is it else the man in themoon?
He dare not come there for thecandle.
For, you see, it is already insnuff.
I am aweary of this moon.
Would it would change.
It would appear, by his smalllight of discretion,
that he is in the wane.
But yet, in courtesy, in allreason,
we must stay the time.
Proceed, Moon.
All that I have to say
is to tell you that the lanternis the moon;
I, the man in the moon;
this thorn-bush, my thorn-bush;
and this dog, my dog.
This is old Ninny's tomb.
Where is my love?
ARR!!
Well roared, Lion.
Well run, Thisbe.
Well shone, Moon.
Well moused, Lion.
And then came Pyramus.
And so the lion vanished.
Sweet moon, I thank thee for thysunny beams.
I thank thee, moon, for shiningnow so bright.
For by thy gracious, golden,glittering gleams,
I trust to take of truest Thisbesight.
But stay, O spite.
But mark, poor knight, whatdreadful dole is here.
Eyes, do you see?
How can it be?
Oh, dainty duck.
Oh, dear.
Thy mantle good, what, stainedwith blood!
Approach, ye Furies fell.
Oh, Fates, come, come.
Cut thread and thrum.
Quail, crush, conclude, andquell.
Beshrew my heart, but I pity theman.
Oh, wherefore, Nature, didstthou lion's frame?
Since lion vile hath heredeflowered my dear,
which is--
no, no--
which was the fairest dame
that lived, that loved, thatliked,
that looked with cheer.
Come, tears, confound.
Out, sword, and wound the pap ofPyramus.
Ay, that left pap, where heartdoth hop.
Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
Now am I dead,
Now am I fled.
My soul is in the sky.
Tongue, lose thy light.
Moon, take thy flight.
Now die...die...
die..die...die...
die.
How chance Moonshine is gone
before Thisbe comes back andfinds her lover?
She will find him by starlight.
Here she comes.
And her passion ends the play.
What, dead, my dove?
O Pyramus, arise!
Speak, speak.
Quite dumb.
Dead, dead.
A tomb must cover thy sweeteyes.
These lily lips, this cherrynose,
these yellow cowslip cheeks aregone, are gone.
Oh, lovers, make moan.
His eyes were green as leeks.
Oh, Sisters three, come, come tome.
With hands as pale as milk, laythem in gore
since you have shore with shearshis thread of silk.
Tongue, not a word.
Come, trusty sword.
Come, blade, my breast imbrue.
And, farewell, friends.
Thus Thisbe ends.
Adieu, adieu, adieu.
Moonshine and Lion are left tobury the dead.
Ay, and Wall too.
No, I assure you;
the wall is down that partedtheir fathers.
Will it please you to see theepilogue
or to hear a Bergomask dancebetween our company?
Uh, no epilogue, I pray you,
for your play needs no excuse.
Never excuse,
for when all the players aredead, there need none to beblamed.
But come, your Bergomask.
Let your epilogue alone.
The iron tongue of midnight hathtold twelve.
Lovers, to bed.
'Tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall out-sleep thecoming morn
as much as we this night haveover-watched.
This palpable-gross play
hath well beguiled the heavygait of night.
Sweet friends, to bed.
Now the hungry lion roars, andthe wolf behowls the moon
whilst the heavy ploughmansnores,
all with weary task fordone.
Now the wasted brands do glow,
whilst the screech-owl,screeching loud,
puts the wretch that lies in woein remembrance of a shroud.
Now it is the time of night thatthe graves all gaping wide,
every one lets forth his sprite,
in the church-way paths toglide.
And we fairies, that do run bythe triple Hecate's team
from the presence of the sunfollowing darkness like a dream
now are frolic.
Not a mouse shall disturb thishallowed house.
I am sent with broom before
to sweep the dust behind thedoor.
Through the house, givegathering light.
By the dead and drowsy fire,
every elf and fairy sprite hopas light as bird from brier.
And this ditty, after me, singand dance it trippingly.
First, rehearse your song byrote
to each word a warbling note.
Hand in hand, with fairy grace,will we sing and bless thisplace.
Now, until the break of day,through this house each fairystray.
To the best bride-bed will we,
which by us shall blessed be.
And the issue there create evershall be fortunate.
So shall all the couples threeever true in loving be.
And the blots of Nature's handshall not in their issue stand.
Never mole, hare lip, nor scar,nor mark prodigious,
such as are despised innativity,
shall upon their children be.
With this field-dew consecrate,every fairy take his gait.
And each several chamber bless,through this palace,
with sweet peace.
And the owner of it blessed evershall in safety rest.
Trip away.
Make no stay.
Meet me all by break of day.
If we shadows have offended,
think but this, and all ismended,
that you have but slumbered herewhile these visions did appear.
And this weak and idle themenomore yielding but a dream.
Gentles, do not reprehend.
If you pardon, we will mend.
And, as I am an honest Puck, ifwe have unearned luck
now to escape the serpent'stongue,
we will make amends ere long,else the Puck a liar call.
So, good night unto you all.